WEEK 8: DOCKER NETWORKING, DNS, AND CONTAINER COMMUNICATION
1. Introduction to Docker Networking
Definition

Docker networking is the system that enables communication between containers, between containers and the host, and between containers across multiple hosts.

Explanation

Containers are isolated by default, which means they cannot communicate with each other or external systems unless explicitly configured. Docker networking provides the mechanisms to connect containers and allow data exchange. It ensures that applications running in different containers can interact securely and efficiently.

Networking is a critical component in containerized environments, especially in microservices architectures, where multiple services need to communicate with each other to function as a complete system.

2. Need for Docker Networking
Explanation

In modern applications, different components such as frontend, backend, and database are often deployed in separate containers. For the application to function properly, these containers must communicate with each other.

Without Docker networking:

Containers remain isolated
Services cannot communicate
Application functionality breaks

With Docker networking:

Containers can communicate using IP or names
Services are accessible across containers
System becomes modular and scalable
3. Types of Docker Networks

Docker provides different types of network drivers to manage communication between containers.

3.1 Bridge Network (Default Network)
Definition

A bridge network is the default network type in Docker that allows containers on the same host to communicate with each other.

Explanation

When a container is created without specifying a network, it is automatically connected to the default bridge network. Containers on the same bridge network can communicate using IP addresses. However, communication using container names is limited unless a custom bridge network is created.

Bridge networks are suitable for standalone applications running on a single host.

Key Points
Default network
Communication via IP
Suitable for single-host environments
Isolation from other networks
3.2 Custom Bridge Network
Definition

A custom bridge network is a user-defined network that provides better communication features than the default bridge network.

Explanation

Custom bridge networks allow containers to communicate using container names instead of IP addresses. They also provide better isolation and automatic DNS resolution, making them more suitable for real-world applications.

Example
docker network create mynetwork

Run containers:

docker run -d --network mynetwork --name container1 nginx
docker run -d --network mynetwork --name container2 alpine
Benefits
Name-based communication
Better isolation
Improved management
3.3 Host Network
Definition

The host network allows a container to share the host system’s network stack.

Explanation

In this mode, the container does not get its own IP address. Instead, it uses the host’s IP address and network interfaces. This removes network isolation but improves performance because there is no network translation.

Key Points
No separate IP
Uses host network directly
High performance
Limited isolation
3.4 Overlay Network
Definition

An overlay network is a network that connects containers across multiple Docker hosts.

Explanation

Overlay networks are used in distributed systems and container orchestration platforms such as Docker Swarm. They allow containers running on different machines to communicate as if they were on the same network.

Key Points
Multi-host communication
Used in clustered environments
Enables distributed applications
4. Container Communication
Explanation

Containers can communicate with each other in different ways depending on the network configuration. In bridge networks, containers typically communicate using IP addresses. In custom networks, they can communicate using container names.

Communication is essential in applications where different services interact, such as a web server connecting to a database.

5. DNS in Docker
Definition

Docker provides a built-in DNS system that allows containers to resolve each other using names instead of IP addresses.

Explanation

In user-defined networks, Docker automatically assigns DNS entries to containers. This allows containers to communicate using their names, simplifying networking and reducing dependency on IP addresses.

Example

If two containers are connected to the same network:

Container name: backend
Another container can access it using: backend
Importance
Simplifies communication
Avoids manual IP management
Improves flexibility
6. Linking Containers (Legacy Method)
Definition

Linking containers is an older method used to connect containers using the --link option.

Explanation

Before custom networks were introduced, Docker used linking to enable communication between containers. This method is now deprecated and replaced by user-defined networks.

Example
docker run -d --name db nginx
docker run -it --name app --link db:database alpine
Limitation
Limited functionality
Not scalable
Deprecated in modern Docker usage
7. Network Commands
docker network ls

Lists all available networks

docker network create

Creates a new network

docker network inspect

Displays details about a network

docker network rm

Removes a network

8. Real-World Example
Scenario

A web application consists of:

Frontend container
Backend container
Database container
Explanation

All containers are connected to the same network. The frontend communicates with the backend using its container name, and the backend communicates with the database in the same way. This setup allows seamless communication between services.