WEEK 5: DOCKER ARCHITECTURE, LIFECYCLE, AND BASIC COMMANDS
1. Introduction to Docker
Definition

Docker is an open-source platform used to develop, package, distribute, and run applications inside containers. It simplifies application deployment by ensuring that applications run consistently across different environments.

Explanation

Docker provides a complete ecosystem for containerization. It allows developers to create container images, store them in registries, and run containers on any system that has Docker installed. By using Docker, developers can eliminate environment-related issues and ensure that applications behave the same way in development, testing, and production environments.

Docker uses operating system-level virtualization and relies on underlying Linux kernel features such as namespaces and control groups to manage containers efficiently.

2. Docker Architecture
Definition

Docker architecture refers to the internal structure and components of Docker that work together to build, manage, and run containers.

Explanation

Docker follows a client-server architecture. The Docker client communicates with the Docker daemon, which performs the actual work of building images, running containers, and managing system resources.

Key Components of Docker Architecture
2.1 Docker Client

Definition:
The Docker client is the command-line interface (CLI) used by users to interact with Docker.

Explanation:
Users execute commands such as docker run, docker pull, and docker build through the client. These commands are sent to the Docker daemon for execution. The client can communicate with the daemon either locally or remotely.

2.2 Docker Daemon

Definition:
The Docker daemon is a background service that manages Docker objects such as images, containers, networks, and volumes.

Explanation:
The daemon listens for API requests from the Docker client and processes them. It is responsible for building images, running containers, managing storage, and handling networking. It acts as the core engine of Docker.

2.3 Docker Images

Definition:
Docker images are read-only templates used to create containers.

Explanation:
Images contain the application code and dependencies required to run a container. They are built using Dockerfiles and stored in registries. When a container is created, it is based on an image.

2.4 Docker Containers

Definition:
A container is a running instance of a Docker image.

Explanation:
Containers are lightweight and isolated environments where applications run. Each container operates independently but shares the host system’s kernel.

2.5 Docker Registry

Definition:
A Docker registry is a repository used to store and distribute Docker images.

Explanation:
Docker Hub is the default public registry. Users can push images to a registry and pull them when needed. Registries enable sharing and versioning of images.

3. Working of Docker Architecture
Explanation

The workflow of Docker architecture can be understood as follows:

The user enters a command using the Docker client
The client sends the request to the Docker daemon
The daemon processes the request
If required, it pulls the image from the registry
The daemon creates and runs the container

This architecture ensures that Docker operations are efficient and scalable.

4. Docker Lifecycle
Definition

The Docker lifecycle describes the stages through which a container goes, from creation to execution and termination.

Stages of Docker Lifecycle
4.1 Build Stage

Explanation:
In this stage, a Docker image is created using a Dockerfile. The image includes all the necessary components required to run the application.

4.2 Ship Stage

Explanation:
The image is pushed to a Docker registry so that it can be accessed by other systems. This ensures portability and consistency.

4.3 Run Stage

Explanation:
The image is pulled from the registry and used to create and run containers. The application becomes operational at this stage.

Container States

A container can exist in different states during its lifecycle:

Created: Container is initialized but not running
Running: Container is actively executing
Paused: Execution is temporarily stopped
Stopped: Container has been terminated
5. Basic Docker Commands
5.1 Image Management Commands
docker pull

Definition:
Downloads an image from a registry.

Explanation:
This command retrieves an image from Docker Hub or another registry and stores it locally.

docker images

Definition:
Lists all available images on the system.

docker rmi

Definition:
Removes a Docker image.

5.2 Container Management Commands
docker run

Definition:
Creates and starts a container from an image.

Explanation:
This is one of the most important Docker commands. It combines multiple actions such as creating, starting, and executing a container.

docker stop

Definition:
Stops a running container.

docker start

Definition:
Starts a stopped container.

docker rm

Definition:
Removes a container.

5.3 Example Commands

Running a container:

docker run ubuntu

Running with terminal:

docker run -it ubuntu /bin/bash

Stopping container:

docker stop <container_id>

Removing container:

docker rm <container_id>

Removing image:

docker rmi ubuntu
6. Additional Useful Commands
docker ps

Lists running containers

docker ps -a

Lists all containers (running and stopped)

docker system prune

Removes unused data such as stopped containers and unused images

7. Real-World Example

To run a web server using Docker:

Pull image:
docker pull nginx
Run container:
docker run -d -p 8080:80 nginx
Access in browser:
http://localhost:8080